Any information to share with this machine about how the Big 12 came to be formed?
Oh, yes.
There's some interesting stories there.
This was turmoil going on for several years, and were you in Missouri at the time?
Okay.
So, you know the inside story.
The Big 12 was a compromise, of course, and the first get-together for this group was a very sterile affair.
Several years before it happened, the Southwest Conference was thinking that we needed to do something, and so somebody, probably Fred Jacoby, made contact with the Big 8.
And we had a dinner session where we all sort of sat around and wondered what we were doing there.
I don't know that any interesting exchange took place.
So then we all go off and two years later we've all forgotten about it.
And now then, all kinds of turmoil is going on.
The Pac-10,
I was thinking of expanding.
I think the Big Ten had just taken in Penn State.
And Arkansas had just left to go to the Southeast Conference.
So now then, the Southwest Conference, without Arkansas now,
So wondering, what are we going to do?
We're going to die on the vine.
Something's going to happen.
Well, most everybody, I think, just said, well, let's just stay together.
We've got to stay together.
We've been together forever.
But other people were thinking other things.
The University of Texas wasn't going to want to die on the vine, and Texas A&M didn't want to die on the vine.
So the University of Texas was involved in negotiation with the Pac-10.
Texas A&M.
at some level was involved, and all these levels were at board level, not at my level.
And some board members were talking to Southeast Conference people, and so lots of talk, lots of talk, and then finally the legislature's in session, and
Texas A&M and University of Texas presidents go to the governor and say, we're not going anywhere.
We're going to stay where we are.
So everybody bought into that, and so we didn't.
We cooled it for a year and just stayed put.
Then it all boiled up again.
Pac-10 was actively pursuing the University of Texas and Southeast Conference, pursuing Texas A&M and vice versa.
The rest of Southwest Conference was out in the co.
The governor, in her infinite wisdom, called the chancellor of the University of Texas in.
Was he chancellor at that time?
Bill Cunningham.
He called Bill Cunningham in.
Now, was he president or was he chancellor at that time?
We've forgotten.
But she called Bill Cunningham in and said, Mr. President, I don't care where the University of Texas goes, but whatever you all do, you better take care of Texas Tech and Baylor.
Yes, ma'am.
And so then, the University of Texas people called the Pac-10 and said, we can't come unless you'll take Texas Tech.
At the same time, Texas A&M people called the Southeast Conference people and said, we can't come unless you'll take Baylor.
Southeast Conference people said, fine.
Pac-10 Conference people said, no way.
Texas A&M people then called Southeast Conference and said, we can't come unless you'll take Baylor and Texas Tech.
They said, no way.
made that deal where it wasn't gonna work, because nobody was gonna fly in the face of the governor and the Speaker of the House at that time, or?
Lieutenant Governor.
The Lieutenant Governor.
Bob Bullock.
Okay, was it Bullock?
Okay, yes, okay.
So nobody was gonna challenge that.
So that then squelched those two possibilities, which then meant that the only way we were gonna put together a viable conference was North-South.
Were you as the faculty rep and athletic council chairman, were you involved at all in this?
Peripheral.
Did anybody ask you for advice?
President, yeah.
But these negotiations were going on at the present level and there was certainly a lot of politicking going on that I wasn't involved in or even very aware of that picked four out of the
eight Southwest Conference schools to, and that certainly caused turmoil.
And, but it, when it started looking about like it was definitely going to go with the 12 schools and the other four were going to be left out in the cold, about that time the WAC came along and took three and that relieved the pressure there.
So everybody thought everybody was going to come out happy.
Houston wasn't too happy, but of course they were
in the least enviable position of anybody.
They were a dead broke legislator after them for spending money in the wrong way on athletics and all that kind of stuff.
And so they then finally teamed up with Conference USA.
And then everybody seemed as if they were going to be happy.
And I think everybody was happy until the whack fell apart.
And so then from the time the decision was made, then we were involved.
We were involved in writing the rules and the compromises.
We were certainly involved in the academic compromises, but it did take the president of the University of Texas to come in heavy-handedly with the partial qualifier rule to beat down Nebraska on that issue.
But then it finally came around to where
At least 11 of the 12 schools were in agreement on the academic issues.
It was best summed up by the faculty rep from Oklahoma and Dan Gibbons, and some meetings said, look, we have a difference of opinion here.
We need a compromise.
The Southwest Conference doesn't want to admit partial qualifiers, and the eight from the big eight
or split on the issue, so we need a compromise, so letting in a limited number of partial qualifiers is a compromise.
Now, live with it.
And I think that at least got on the surface Nebraska to agree to live with it, although every meeting I'm at I have to fight on that issue.
In hindsight, on all this athletic experience, any opportunities we missed for progress, success,
I don't think so.
There's certainly a lot of things we should have done differently and didn't, but as far as opportunities that missed, I think we've come out as well as we could possibly come out.
I always opposed going with southeast Congress.
Oh, that would have been awful.
I always opposed that and would oppose it to anybody who would listen, but of course nobody was listening to me in those days.
I thought that was a very, very wrong way to go.
I would not have objected academically to the Pac-10
alliance, but they never were very interested in us.
And I argue that the average person that's concerned about going to an A&M game is not very interested in going to a game in Starkville or Auburn or Columbia, South Carolina.
No, no, no.
Or Corvillis or Eugene.
No, no, no, no.
No.
Right, right.
So I think the way it has come out, now then, my first preference would have been to retain the Southwest Conference.
I love the Southwest Conference.
But there was no way that 6% of the television sets were going to survive in a world driven by television.
We had to have a larger fraction of the television sets, and teaming up with the eight teams from the Big Eight has made us a very strong conference.
All right, let's – have we missed any important topics?
I can't think of anything.
Okay.
Let's make believe that you now are the new consultant to Texas A&M's leadership.
What advice would you give them about going from here to the future on whatever topic you want?
Well, I'm very prejudiced.
Our major problems, as I've alluded to in the sciences, certainly in physics, are quality students.
And I'm not sure there's much that can be done about undergraduate students, but graduate students, we are desperately in need of graduate students.
We rank last on most any academic, on most any financial issue that has to do with graduate students.
You mean in compensation and so forth?
Compensation, yeah.
Almost all of our competing universities waive tuitions for graduate students.
We don't.
Almost all of our competing institutions pay a higher stipend to the graduate students than we do.
And we plead this case time and time again, and nobody's interested.
I think it's because the college, I think this is a problem unique to the College of Science.
I think College of Business, College of Liberal Arts, Education, I think they're getting all the graduate students they want.
Their stipends, competitive or not competitive, they're getting what they want.
Engineering, they don't even give stipends to their first-year graduate students.
A lot of our graduate students come over here.
We hire them for a year and then they're gone over to there.
And so we need, in the sciences, we desperately need help to be competitive
for graduate students, for top quality graduate students.
But that's sort of a narrow, selfish view.
Any other advice?
Pardon?
Any other advice to the leadership?
I think admissions.
I would love to see admissions reworked.
I don't think high school grades
and SAT scores are going to give us the type student I want to see here.
How large could the enrollment be though?
How many more students can we accommodate?
That's my point though.
I'd like to throw them out the back door.
I think we're letting a lot of them stay that should not stay.
And so I would open that back door.
I want to let them in and give them a chance.
I would like to see that go to the college level too.
The colleges now are
going to 2.5 GPA or we won't talk to you.
I'd like to see some exceptions.
Let those associate deans make some decisions not based on grades but based on the attitude, the background of the kid.
Let them in the door and tell them they're out the next year if they don't perform.
Right now you can't get in the door.
I think that's a mistake.
Dr. Williams said, rank in class is the best way to judge success in college.
I haven't seen anything since those days that convinced me he was wrong.
I think that's right.
If you're going to fight your way to the top of your class, even if it's a mediocre class, that tells me something
So you're not talking to someone who's opposed to this legislative 10% rule that a lot of people are fighting about.
I think we need a program here for, maybe I can't say weaker students, but I think we need programs for students who are less sophisticated in math.
There are very few programs at Texas A&M where you can go in and perform unless you have a sophistication in math that's higher.
You look at the University of Texas, they have programs where they can put students who
I couldn't compete in a world that requires some reasonable mathematics from my standpoint.
You look at all the schools.
It's difficult when I make such statements because I get accused of being this way because of athletics, and I'm not.
I am not.
It certainly would benefit the athletic program if there were some less sophisticated programs.
But there are a number of academic things that I just flat disagree with the majority of our faculty on.
The first one was doing away with exemption for finals for seniors.
That was a Vandiver mistake also.
Well, no, that was a faculty senate mistake.
Oh, was it?
Oh.
That was the first action of our faculty senate.
Oh, really?
Oh.
Led by Murray Milford.
Really?
Which really surprised me.
I didn't know that.
Really surprised me.
My position was we usually have them for 10 sets of final exams, so what if they miss 10 percent?
That's right.
And how many people change their semester grade on a final exam very much?
So I oppose that.
I am very, very opposed to not replacing a lower grade when you take the course over again.
You make an F or a D, you come back and make a B, along with this guy over here who had never taken it before and made a B. Why don't you deserve a B, and let's forget about that D that you made?
But you can't convince this faculty to get rid of that.
Whereas the universities around the country, some very, very classy universities around the country, operate that way.
If someone walked up to you and gave you a check for a million dollars with one requirement, that it be passed on to Texas A&M and you decide the use to be made of your gift.
You know the answer to this.
What would it be?
Stipends for graduate students in science.
Okay.
That's part of my complaint.
We go in front of the provost and the president annually, and we talk about our major problem in the College of Science, stipends for graduate students, and faculty salaries too.
But physics faculty are paid at 87% of competing peer institutions.
But stipends are of more concern than faculty salaries, because without the graduate students, we don't have a graduate program in physics.
Every meeting we have, we go over these things, stipend, stipend.
eventually evolves to what we're going to do with extra money, like the new $17 million, $20 million we're getting because of the change in the law.
And we immediately start talking about endowed chairs, endowed fellowships, and things like this.
And so the priorities don't include something that is basic to our program, the very foundation of our program, and that's graduate students, good, solid graduate students.
I had forgotten that you were an A&M undergraduate, or I might have done your student days first.
We'll do that later.
Next, the last question.
What did you learn at Texas A&M while you were a student that has made a difference in your life?
What has it, having been an Aggie?
Oh, I'm sure that, well, I think
The leadership work within the Corps of Cadets that I was involved in, I think that certainly shaped the way I look at things and do things.
So that was a positive experience.
I am fairly critical of that organization now.
I think in those days it served a good purpose and that was the only
outside classroom learning experience you could have at this university in those days.
Nowadays, there are many more opportunities for expanding your horizons beyond the classroom.
So that was important.
Last question.
What feelings do you hold in your heart for Texas A&M today?
Oh, I'm certainly very fond of the place.
It's been my life for 30-some odd years.
But I think that I live so close to it, I see the warts.
It's much more pleasant, I think, for my buddies who don't live here in town and don't see
all of the things.
I think it's like anything else.
There's so many positives and so many negatives.
You've got to keep telling yourself, let's just focus on the positives.
We've got so many positives around here, but I'm afraid I'm like, I'll never, you taught me a very important lesson.
You'll never remember this, but I was just absolutely astounded at your criticism.
And then it dawned on me, well, that's our job.
We're faculty.
We don't look for the positives.
We look for the negatives.
But you and somebody else and I walked through Kane Hall when it first opened.
And I was, yeah, I was brand new in the job up there.
And you and the other person, I forgot who it was, were very critical of all the little details in this building.
And that stuck in my mind.
And I thought, geez, this beautiful dorm.
And I lived in that dump across campus that's still a dump, as a matter of fact.
And this beautiful temple here, these people are picking the pieces.
Okay, so that sunk in.
And then the next year, see it opened.
Barb Sears, one of the first students to live in that dorm.
And she and another group from that dorm came to see me as assistant to the president to complain about the dorm.
And their complaints were just, to me, completely trivial.
Here they're living in this beautiful, beautiful place and they're complaining because the carpeting doesn't go all the way in the hallway.
They're complaining because the windows are too narrow?
They're complaining?
I mean, I just was.
So, the same thing here.
We've got tons of positive things around here, but I'm surrounded by faculty.
who pick at the negatives, and we have plenty of those.
But it's a great university, and it's certainly been good to me, and I love the place and all that, but I have worked hard not to let losing football games bother me.
Let's quit on that.